documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/operations-guide/jaspi/chapter.adoc, before:

//
// ========================================================================
// Copyright (c) 1995-2021 Mort Bay Consulting Pty Ltd and others.
//
// This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
// terms of the Eclipse Public License v. 2.0 which is available at
// https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0, or the Apache License, Version 2.0
// which is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
//
// SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0
// ========================================================================
//

[[og-jaspi]]
=== JASPI

Enabling this module allows Jetty to utilize authentication modules that implement the Jakarta Authentication (JASPI) specification. JASPI provides an SPI (Service Provider Interface) for pluggable, portable, and standardized authentication modules. Compatible modules are portable between servers that support the JASPI specification. This module provides a bridge from Jakarta Authentication to the Jetty Security framework.

Only modules conforming to the "Servlet Container Profile" with the ServerAuthModule interface within the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/authentication/2.0/jakarta-authentication-spec-2.0.pdf[JakartaAuthentication] are supported. These modules must be configured before start-up.  Operations for runtime registering or de-registering authentication modules are not supported. 

[[og-jaspi-configuration]]
==== Configuration

[[og-jaspi-module]]
===== The `jaspi` module

Enable the `jaspi` module:

----
include::{JETTY_HOME}/modules/jaspi.mod[]
----

[[og-jaspi-xml]]
===== Configure JASPI

To enable the `jaspi` module you can use the following command (issued from within the `$JETTY_BASE` directory):

----
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-modules=jaspi
----

You can then register a `AuthConfigProvider` onto the static `AuthConfigFactory` obtained with `AuthConfigFactory.getFactory()`. This registration can be done in the XML configuration file which will be copied to `$JETTY_BASE/jaspi/jaspi-authmoduleconfig.xml` when the module is enabled.

====== JASPI Demo
The `jaspi-demo` module illustrates setting up HTTP Basic Authentication using a Jakarta Authentication module that comes packaged with jetty: `org.eclipse.jetty.security.jaspi.modules.BasicAuthenticationAuthModule`, and applies it for a context named `/test`.

[source, xml, subs="{sub-order}"]
----
include::{SRCDIR}/jetty-jaspi/src/main/config/etc/jaspi/jaspi-demo.xml[tags=documentation]
----

This example uses the `AuthConfigProvider` implementation provided by Jetty to register a `ServerAuthModule` directly. Other custom or 3rd party modules that are compatible with the `ServerAuthModule` interface in JASPI can be registered in the same way.

===== Integration with Jetty Authentication Mechanisms

To integrate with Jetty authentication mechanisms you must add a `LoginService` to your context. The `LoginService` provides a way for you to obtain a `UserIdentity` from a username and credentials. JASPI can interact with this Jetty `LoginService` by using the `PasswordValidationCallback`.

The `CallerPrincipalCallback` and `GroupPrincipalCallback` do not require use of a Jetty `LoginService`. The principal from the `CallerPrincipalCallback` will be used directly with the `IdentityService` to produce a `UserIdentity`.

Commit message:

Issue #6406 - add documentation for use of custom AuthConfigFactories
Signed-off-by: Lachlan Roberts <lachlan@webtide.com>

documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/operations-guide/jaspi/chapter.adoc, after:

//
// ========================================================================
// Copyright (c) 1995-2021 Mort Bay Consulting Pty Ltd and others.
//
// This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
// terms of the Eclipse Public License v. 2.0 which is available at
// https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0, or the Apache License, Version 2.0
// which is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
//
// SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0
// ========================================================================
//

[[og-jaspi]]
=== JASPI

Enabling this module allows Jetty to utilize authentication modules that implement the Jakarta Authentication (JASPI) specification. JASPI provides an SPI (Service Provider Interface) for pluggable, portable, and standardized authentication modules. Compatible modules are portable between servers that support the JASPI specification. This module provides a bridge from Jakarta Authentication to the Jetty Security framework.

Only modules conforming to the "Servlet Container Profile" with the ServerAuthModule interface within the https://jakarta.ee/specifications/authentication/2.0/jakarta-authentication-spec-2.0.pdf[JakartaAuthentication] are supported. These modules must be configured before start-up.  Operations for runtime registering or de-registering authentication modules are not supported. 

[[og-jaspi-configuration]]
==== Configuration

[[og-jaspi-module]]
===== The `jaspi` module

Enable the `jaspi` module:

----
include::{JETTY_HOME}/modules/jaspi.mod[]
----

[[og-jaspi-xml]]
===== Configure JASPI

To enable the `jaspi` module you can use the following command (issued from within the `$JETTY_BASE` directory):

----
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-modules=jaspi
----

You can then register a `AuthConfigProvider` onto the static `AuthConfigFactory` obtained with `AuthConfigFactory.getFactory()`. This registration can be done in the XML configuration file which will be copied to `$JETTY_BASE/jaspi/jaspi-authmoduleconfig.xml` when the module is enabled.

====== JASPI Demo
The `jaspi-demo` module illustrates setting up HTTP Basic Authentication using a Jakarta Authentication module that comes packaged with jetty: `org.eclipse.jetty.security.jaspi.modules.BasicAuthenticationAuthModule`, and applies it for a context named `/test`.

[source, xml, subs="{sub-order}"]
----
include::{JETTY_HOME}/etc/jaspi/jaspi-demo.xml[]
----

This example uses the `AuthConfigProvider` implementation provided by Jetty to register a `ServerAuthModule` directly. Other custom or 3rd party modules that are compatible with the `ServerAuthModule` interface in JASPI can be registered in the same way.

===== Integration with Jetty Authentication Mechanisms

To integrate with Jetty authentication mechanisms you must add a `LoginService` to your context. The `LoginService` provides a way for you to obtain a `UserIdentity` from a username and credentials. JASPI can interact with this Jetty `LoginService` by using the `PasswordValidationCallback`.

The `CallerPrincipalCallback` and `GroupPrincipalCallback` do not require use of a Jetty `LoginService`. The principal from the `CallerPrincipalCallback` will be used directly with the `IdentityService` to produce a `UserIdentity`.

===== Replacing the Jetty DefaultAuthConfigFactory

Jetty provides an implementation of the `AuthConfigFactory` interface which is used to register `AuthConfigProviders`. This can be replaced by a custom implementation by adding a custom module which provides `auth-config-factory`.
This custom module must reference an XML file which sets a new instance of the `AuthConfigFactory` with the static method `AuthConfigFactory.setFactory()`.
For an example of this see the `jaspi-default-auth-config-factory` module, which provides the default implementation used by Jetty.

----
include::{JETTY_HOME}/modules/jaspi-default-auth-config-factory.mod[]
----
